County Engineering Department. Today's date is
September 4th, 1981. Dr. Hawkins, let us begin by
your telling something about your early years in
Kentucky.
Well, as I said, I was born in a little coal mining
town called Weeksbury, Kentucky. That's
W-E-E-K-S-B-U-R-Y. It was a town of about a
thousand people, no less than that probably.
Typical Eastern Kentucky coal mining town. My dad
in early years was a engineer in the sense of a
railroad engineer. He ran the power plant and then
he got in the grocery store business and I grew up in
that environment. My dad was a merchant.
During the World War II years, we moved to
Louisville, Kentucky.
My father worked for DuPont. After World War II, we
moved back to eastern Kentucky to a different town
called Wheelwright. That's
W-A-T-E-L-W-R-I-G-H-T. One word? Yes. It was a
different coal mining town, and my dad went back
into the grocery business, and I finished, or grew
up in that environment, finished high school
there. Well, actually I didn't finish high
school. I went through the junior year, and I was
lucky enough to receive a Ford Foundation
scholarship, which was an experimental program
at the time. What year was this? Let's see, that
must have been about 54.
Sounds about right. Plus or minus a year. Been a
while. And so I missed my senior year in high school
and went to University of Louisville. The program
was to
test the relevance of the senior year in high
school.
I struggled through those years. Of course, I came
from a small country school.
Went to college without all the necessary
preparation in chemistry and physics and
trigonometry. So it was an interesting
experience. I survived. University of
Louisville was a very fine engineering school,
majored in mechanical engineering. Went through
their co-op program, and after about I guess two
and a half years, I was going on another co-op
program. And I happened to visit home. And my
former principal of the high school I graduated
from, or finished in,
persuaded me to teach high school for a year. He
convinced me that was a better experience than a
co-op.
It was an experience. When did you complete? Did
you complete the bachelor's program in
engineering University of Louisville? No. I was
going on a co-op period. I was probably two and a
half years into the program. And so when I went back
to teach high school, at that time, Louisville was
a quite intense school, and I guess I had an
equivalent of about 104 or 105 semester hours. And
that was sufficient for a high school teaching
certificate, a temporary certificate. And so,
like I said, my principal convinced me that that
was better experience than co-op. And so I taught
high school for a year. What year was that, 57, 58?
Sounds about right.
What did you teach, science? Taught mathematics,
algebra, geometry, and biology. Was it difficult
to attract teachers in that part of the state?
Probably not during that time. They just had ended
up with an opening. And I was passing through town
at that time. And it looked like a reasonably good
experience. It was, like I said. How were you when
you were teaching? Well, that was the interesting
part. Let's see, I was, because I left high school a
year early, I was probably about, I went to college
when I was 17, so I was about 19 probably. maybe 20.
Did you have some of the students who were older
than you? Yeah. And of course, a lot of my friends
who I had known as freshmen were still always
teaching them. So it was an interesting
experience. Did they take advantage of the
attempt to? No. No. In fact, I guess I was, like all
young people, a rebel. And the principal and I had
some disagreement. I think I ended up flunking
about half of the mathematics classes. I don't
think I failed anybody in biology, because my
attitude was they probably, I probably was not an
expert in biology, but I figured I knew
mathematics. And I was persuaded to, or tried to
convince me that really we shouldn't be flunking
people. And I guess that was where I got my first
experience to my ideas about what was wrong with
education, that the philosophy was that maybe we
ought to keep them off the street. don't agree with
that philosophy, and I still don't. And I think
education is a privilege. But I finished school
then. I mean, finished teaching school. And of
course, when I
prepared to re-enter University of Louisville,
because I had taught, I had gotten out of sequence
in co-op. And so what happened, I didn't go back
this summer. I worked that summer. I had prepared
to go back in the fall and pick up where I went, where
I left off. And I got on the wrong co-op sequence.
And University of Louisville, the way it was, the
way they ran the program is there was two different
classes. And if you went on, you staggered them.
And so it would have been necessary to stay away a
year or a quarter. So I decided to transfer schools
and went to University of Kentucky. And so I
finished, got my B.S. at University of Kentucky in
mechanical engineering. What year was that? It
was 1960.
I must have started at 55. I can't remember. It took
five years to go through with teaching. When you
were teaching school that year, do you remember
what your salary was? I have no idea. I was curious
for a comparison purposes. It probably was under
$3,000 a year. I wouldn't have the slightest idea.
Okay, you completed your B.S. from the University
of Kentucky. Yes. Where? Lexington? Lexington.
In 1960, a mechanical engineer. 1960, right.
Okay, how did the experiences with your father and
some parts of his relationship with coal mining,
how did this affect your career choice? Did that
have anything to do with it? Well, I guess most
engineers, you tend to be, mechanically
inclined. I suppose in my, some facts about
engineering, I think it's changed now, but up
until
this generation, most engineering students are
typically the first
child in the family to get a college education.
It's typically the first professional programs.
And also a lot of young men at that time went into the
program because they liked machinery. They liked
automobiles. That's what got me there. You
related to automobiles and trains and airplanes
as being what you were involved in. And when I got
the Ford Foundation scholarship, the
scholarship required a science education. And
basically my choices were physics, mathematics,
or engineering. And I chose engineering
primarily because of the association with
machinery.
Young people usually go into engineering
thinking that they're going to immediately build
cars. And you find out that engineering really is
very mathematically oriented and not what you
thought it was. But usually by the time you're
halfway through, it's too late to back out. But in
any case, I graduated University of Kentucky in
1960.
Where did you get your master's degree? I studied
at University of Kentucky. I probably am like most
young people. I got a master's degree because
somebody asked me to. And being young and naive at
the time, I was very flattered. But at the time, we
had an old German fella. called Carl Otto Lang. And
along
with my senior year, I had the opportunity to take a
class from him. And he flattered me by saying that I
should stay in graduate school. And that was a bit
different than it is now when we
try to get everybody into graduate school. So I did
stay, and he was director of what was called the
Wintergren Aeronautical Lab.
It's W-E-N-N-E-R hyphen G-R-E-N. And Wintergren
is,
the money was donated. Wintergren happened to be
the man who was behind the Electrolux
Corporation. And his nationality, it seemed that
he was European. I think he was possibly Swiss or
whatever. But he donated a laboratory, and I
understand during World War II there was some
question about his allegiance and some cloud over
the whole thing. But in any case, Dr. Lang was the
director of the lab. At that time, most of the work
we were doing, they were doing, was in
bioengineering. And so I went to work for him and
got involved in the bioengineering program, got
interested in that program, did a lot of work in...
All over everything. I'll tell you a bit about the
work, but the laboratory was under contract of the
Air Force, and we were doing work in human
tolerance studies, tolerance to acceleration
and vibration. We were also doing a program of
training chimpanzees for space flight at that
time.
I was not directly involved in the chimpanzee
training program. My involvement was in the human
tolerance side. Very interesting experience. We
spent probably half our time at Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base in Dayton doing experimental work
on human subjects. And of course, about half time
in research at the University in Lexington. And I
finished that program. 1961, and by that time I
failed to mention that I was married a couple of
years earlier. We had a child and felt that we
couldn't afford to go on to pursue a PhD. Had had to
borrow money to get as far as I was, so we were forced
to go to industry.
I guess I made my mind up about the time I entered
graduate school that I would eventually get a PhD.
When did you finish the MA? In 62? No, 61. It took a
year and a half. December of 61, I think it was.
Okay, and then what company did you work for? I went
to work at Pratt & Whitney Aircraft first. It's
P-R-A-T-T and W-H-I-T-N-E-Y Aircraft. And Pratt
& Whitney is one of the two major jet engine
manufacturers. Is that in California? No. Pratt
the home or the base operations in Connecticut.
But they had recently built a research and
development center in Florida. So I went with
their research and development center in
Florida. That's West Palm Beach. I
went into what they call their applied research
division. And probably 10 people when I arrived
and 150 when I left. So I was there during most of the
growth years. I suppose I stayed with Pratt &
Whitney about three years. I'm not good at dates.
And left Pratt & Whitney and went to Huntsville,
Alabama with Chrysler Corporation and their
space division. Headed up a group of engineers
there.
Worked for Chrysler about a similar amount of time
and decided that it was time to get serious about
education again. I ended up going from Chrysler
Corporation to Brown Engineering
for several reasons. One is some
dissatisfaction with Chrysler management.
a better opportunity and a better opportunity to
go to school. Where was this at? It's in
Huntsville. They were both in Huntsville. So I
started back to school and going at nights and I
took over University of Alabama in Huntsville is
where I started.
Taking a course at night, this seemed difficult
with the job I had. I was in management. And so I
asked Brown to transfer me to the research
division so that I would not have to be involved
with people to pursue my education. And they did.
So I had the opportunity to work by myself on my own
projects. And I guess I went for another year
trying to take courses at night and decided that
was not the way to get an advanced education. And
ultimately went back to school full time at the
University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa. and
graduated with a PhD in engineering mechanics in
1969.
Went from there to West Virginia University in
Morgantown. Spent six years there as a professor,
associate professor, mechanical engineering.
Well, actually, that's not quite correct. When I
first went to school there, it was a, they had a
department of theoretical and applied
mechanics, which is where I joined. After about
three years, I guess I remember, the department
was combined with the mechanical engineering
department. The mechanical engineering
department head stepped down for whatever
reason, I don't know. And the decision was made to
combine departments, and the department head who
was And the mechanics department became the head
of the combined department. So we were mechanical
engineering and mechanics. But anyway, I stayed
there for six years. Got involved in a lot of
different research areas.
Left there and went to Memphis State University as
department chairman. Stayed there two years and
came here in your four years. In 1977, you came
here? Is that four years ago? That's what it would
be. How did you happen to come to Texas A&M?
Well, the job was open. It was advertised. I can't
remember whether I was recommended or applied,
but essentially applied. And I was offered the
job. You came in what capacity? Department head.
You came directly as department head?
What are some of the duties that you undertake now
as department head, just generally? Well, of all
the things, I guess it's probably the most
difficult to talk about is what I do as department
head.
I suppose it's more appropriate to find out what
you want to know in this interview. Obviously, we
could talk for the rest of the week about various
aspects of my life. It might be well, let me ask you
again, what are you really trying to get out of the
interview as far as we've gone through a brief, or
do you want to concentrate on the past history or
recent history? Just what you've experienced as
you've been here now since we got up to this point.
Well, I think it would be well to talk a little bit
about the department and A&M as I see it.
From my perspective, A&M, as you well know, is an
old school. And I like to explain to people as a
college, it's 105 years old or whatever. As a
university, it's maybe 20. So A&M is a university
very much in transition. from numbers, because of
its goals, its place in society, its attitudes
about itself.
To tell you an experience, when I interviewed for
the job, I had a
I happened to be interviewing at the time when The
department was having the Pytos Sigma banquet.
That's our honorary
society.
Pytos Sigma's Greek letter is
P-I-T-A-U-S-I-G-E-M-A.
That's the Mechanical Engineering Honorary
Society.
The reason the job was opening, the individual who
was in the job was retiring, Cliff Semaine. And
Clifford had been in the job. About 24 years, best I
can remember. I'm interviewing him first. OK. So
Cliff,
are you interviewing Charlie Crawford? I haven't
set that one up yet. Do. The most important one of
all three of us is Charlie Crawford.
But in any case, the
interesting thing about that, I was first
impressed that someone had survived as a
department head for 24 years. That's even more
amazing now that I really know what it means to be
department head at A&M. But at the banquet, he went
and introduced me to somebody. And he introduced
me to Charlie Crawford. And Charlie was
department head for maybe 27 years. I need to talk
to Charlie about that. The impressive thing about
meeting those two men standing in the same place,
that represented a half a century of this
department. And that
period represented a lot of changes, but not the
drastic ones. Tremendous history. And not only
did it represent a half a century of the
department, but also half of the whole history of
the department, was standing there and two living
men. I remember my comment at the time, I said I
certainly wanted a job, because obviously you
live forever. It must be an easy job, but I found out
it really wasn't. But A&M, up until that time, was a
relatively, from my perception, a relatively
stable organization. I guess the university
changed presidents and relatively often, like
most universities do. But department heads were
in place for a long period of time. Deans had
generally long enough time to put programs into
effect. And the administration was stable.
Cliffs of Maine, quite literally, is a giant of a
man, if you haven't met Cliff.
He's an imposing figure. He's about 6'4".
a fine man, but characteristically probably as
different from me as one could get in that Cliff ran
the department like A&M was run, had been run for a
hundred years. He was a retired general in
reserve. He ran the department with a lot of
discipline and with very much the way I would
suppose that A&M as a college was run 20 years
earlier. From my perception, A&M came into the
20th century a step at a time. They made the
transition literally of a department at a time,
which I think was very appropriate. No one seemed
to be in a great haste. I think our dean, Dean
Benson, which I really think is probably in my
estimation, a real giant of a man, shows the time
when Glyphosate of Maine retired to make a change
in the department. As you may know, we are
organized both as a department and as a research
division. As an example, this department is a
division of the Texas Engineering Experiment
Station and also a department of mechanical
engineering. Right now, I hold both titles. I'm
the head of the Mechanical Engineering
Department. I'm also head of the Mechanical
Engineering Division of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. Cliff was not. This duty was
shared by another individual. So he concentrated
on the academic program, primarily the
undergraduate program. When I came, my charge
from Fred Benson was quite simple. It was a
two-paragraph charge to build a graduate
research program of equal quality to our
undergraduate program and to concentrate on
those research areas that are important to the
state of Texas. And I repeat that. Whatever chance
I get when I'm asked what our goals are, I say that's
what our goals are. I see no reason to change it. I
think it's what we're in business for. But quite
obviously, the need for building research and
graduate programs and reputations of the
university, the college within the university,
in the department within the college was
important for several reasons.
One is, from my perception, when you're a
relatively small
college, you can assume a role quite differently
than when you're a major university. People
perceive you differently. They perceive quality
differently. When you suddenly become the
largest college of engineering possibly in the
world, certainly in the nation. The largest
department of mechanical engineering is not
sufficient to just do undergraduate education.
People start measuring you against your peer
group. And of course, I think our peer group happen
to be schools, large state schools like Purdue and
Georgia Tech and Illinois and Virginia Tech. And
so the outside world, whether it's other
students, whether it's the community, or whether
it's the government, a perceived quality of where
you stand in your peer groups. So we said as a major
objective was to fulfill this particular role and
build our
research of the quality and quantity that would be
expected in the University Department of
Science. When I came, I guess the department was,
within the college, very near the bottom in
research. To tell you some statistics, we have
grown in enrollment from a little over 800 to about
1,700 this fall. So we've just about doubled in
enrollment. In four years. In four years. In the
graduate enrollment, it's grown about 300%.
We've about tripled the graduate enrollment.
about 30 to a little over 90. In research, we've
gone from about 200,000 to a little over 2 million.
So we've grown about 1,000% in research. We've
more than doubled our faculty, which is not
sufficient, obviously, because we've gone from a
faculty, I don't remember the exact number, from
about 30 to, I suppose right now, We have two
unfilled positions, but we would be about 69, 67,
somewhere in there. I'm embarrassed to say I can't
remember. So the faculty is doubled with almost
covering the undergraduate enrollment, but it
doesn't cover the tremendous expansion in the
research program. This research now puts the
department second in the college. We like to point
out that we're second to civil engineering, which
is very heavily involved with the Texas
Transportation Institute. So we've done quite
well in meeting our goals. Our faculty
publications have gone from about, the data's
hard to get from four years ago, but two or three per
year to this year, about 100. And so this faculty,
of course, I'm very proud of. But I think it's an
extremely productive faculty. I spend most of my
time trying to get people to recognize the
tremendous productivity of this faculty. We have
a teaching load that's about double any other
college of engineering, Department of
Mechanical Engineering in the state. We teach
about twice as much as a typical faculty at the
University of Houston or University of Texas. How
much is that, 12 hours? Our average teaching load
has gone down to about 10 hours, but only because
our class sizes have gone up to over 200. So we're
really, our teaching load is still there. We
haven't been able to
be very honest. I'm not convinced yet that this is
the direction to go in large classes. This is an
experiment that was very much suggested by our
dean, and we're trying to see an effect.
The data is not all in, but I'm not pleased with it.
So in any case, the department has gone through a
tremendous transition, not without some growing
pains. We've lost several of the faculty who were
here for a long time. We've had several people
decide to choose careers in industry. So we have a
very young faculty that probably, I suppose, in
the short four years, I've hired about 75% of the
faculty. So the department is one that's in
transition. We've started numerous new
programs. Our research programs,
well, they're quite broad. We can go in detail. But
essentially, every program that's ongoing is
new. It's less than four years old. So we've
changed from predominantly an undergraduate
department to what we hope is becoming a much more
balanced graduate research and undergraduate
education department. But you said mechanical
engineering has the second highest enrollment in
the Department of Engineering. No, no. I think we
have the highest enrollment. You compared it as
second to civil engineering in what capacity? In
dollars of research. Now, in numbers of students,
We have more students, significantly more
students, than any degree-granting program in
the college, significantly more. The industrial
engineering department is a conglomerate of
computer science, industrial engineering,
safety engineering, and bioengineering. And I
think collectively, they probably have as many or
a few more students than we do. As an example, I
don't know the exact figures, but the industrial
engineering program may be 400 students to our
1,700. Computer science may be 1,000. They may be
more. I don't know. Bio may be a couple hundred.
Collectively, they're an equivalent science
department. These new faculty people that you
have hired, what are some of the institutions
that
they have come from? Oh, let me think. Just say over
the last two years. I can remember. I'd have to look
up the rest of them. Well, we have faculty from
Berkeley, from MIT, from Virginia Tech. from Penn
State, from Ohio State, from Purdue, Oklahoma
State, University of Texas,
Lehigh, Georgia Tech.
Let me pause a minute and start to think of
individuals.
University of Illinois.
I would say that of the people that we brought into
the department during the last four years, 85% to
90% are from what would be considered the top 10
engineering schools. And the only school in the
state, for example, well, I would say that the only
schools I can recall that would not be considered
in the top 10 would be we hired one fellow from SMU.
I don't know if I mentioned Berkeley. We have a
couple of guys from Berkeley, from USC,
University of Southern California. We have a guy
on the staff now from the Technion in Israel. Can
you spell that? Can't. Technion is, I would
consider, the best technical university in
Israel and one of the best in the world. It's
certainly equivalent to our best engineering
schools. Do you have very many women enrolling in
mechanical engineering? It's increasing
yearly. I'd say our overall average is somewhere
around close to 15%. Each class is a little larger
than the other. I would say overall now it's about
15%. The freshman enrollment may be up to around
20%, 25%. It increases each year. Do you find that
women students enrolling are... in about the same
capacity as the male students? No, I think they're
superior. In what regard? Every regard,
intellectually. I'm talking on the average.
I would say also I would point out that I've been
department head or chairman of two universities.
This makes a total of six years. I think this is the
first year that the American Society of
Mechanical Engineering student chapter has not
been chaired by a woman. And this is an elective
position by the students. And this says something
about their leadership ability and
aggressiveness. And so it's not just a matter of a
good student intellectually. The females that
are coming to engineering, obviously, it takes a
little bit more of aggression and desire to break
into a male-dominated field. So the women that are
choosing engineering My personal feeling is not
necessarily the cross-section of the female
population, but the ones that have the better
mental ability, but also the higher desire and
motivation. And it's proving that way in class. I
don't think my personal feeling is, I think on a
whole you'd find the male and female population
about the same, but right now those who are
choosing engineering are certainly the
pioneering type. Why do you have so few blacks who
enroll in engineering programs? I have no idea.
Absolutely none. I may have personal opinions,
but they're worthless. Are you talking about at
A&M or in general? Either. My personal feeling is
A&M, we are
somehow, we have to bring Prairie View in as a
factor. I think the students who choose to go to
this system look at the opportunity to go to
Prairie View A&M or Texas A&M, and both have
engineering schools. And those who choose to go to
engineering have to make a choice of one of the two.
I don't know how that relates, but I'm sure it must
relate. And I'm sure that must somehow influence
the decision of a young black of saying, do I go to
school that's has an engineering program, is very
oriented toward my culture and my race, or do I go to
a school which has a great reputation but is
predominantly white, maybe doesn't understand
my culture or my problems? And I don't know how that
affects a student. I haven't sat down and quizzed
one. But a personal opinion that must enter into
decision making. I think all engineering schools
that blacks do not choose engineering as a career
as readily as they do others. Again, you have
opinions. I think a lot of it is you hear people say
role models. I think role models has definitely a
factor. I think preparation is a factor. I think
in the past, I think black students have not
necessarily got an equivalent education or been
encouraged to take science and mathematics as a
preparation force. for college, and it's
certainly necessary.
I guess I question one thing I don't understand. As
I mentioned earlier, in the past, people who chose
engineering were typically the first child in the
family that was college educated. And of course,
in the black community, this is a similar
situation to what you saw in the farm communities a
generation or two ago. But it seems that many of the
blacks are choosing business or one of the other
professions as the first profession as opposed to
engineering. So why the change, I don't know. What
salary levels do starting mechanical engineers
command today?
In the neighborhood of $25,000 a year. Do people
with higher degrees expect higher salaries? Yes.
How much? A master's degree, and these should not
be taken as exact figures. They're available if we
want them. But a master's degree typically is
$1,500 to $2,000 a year or more. A PhD, it's hard to
put a figure on it because it's so much variation
with individuals and where they go and desire. But
I would say a PhD might average, and this is my
personal guess, another $5,000 a year or more
starting salary than a BS so that he a BS maybe 25, a
master's maybe 27, a PhD around 30 to 32, somewhere
in there. What are some of the companies that
mechanical engineering graduates from here
would go to work for? I would take the rest of the
day. Just a few of the major, a couple or three of the
major ones? Oh, here, of course, in the chemical
companies, all of them. Selenese, Dow, DuPont,
Monsanto, and, of course, in the petroleum
companies, all of them. Exxon, Shell, Gulf. What
type of reputation do A&M graduates of
engineering have in industry? The
undergraduates, I think, second to none. I base
that on, obviously, what recruiters tell me and
what my friends in the industry tell me. And I'm
convinced that our undergraduates in
engineering in general, and certainly
mechanical, have a...
Extremely high reputation.
Our graduate students are good. I can't say that
people would come to A&M and see a graduate
student, say, above MIT. But it would be just the
opposite in undergraduate. And I think there's
reasons for it. I think our students, well,
clearly, as I tell my students, we don't have
better faculty. We have better students. And I
believe that. We get a better product in the front
door, and we end up with a better product leaving.
So what makes our students better? Several
things. We get a good student. Intellectually,
he's as good or better than any other student in
engineering. His motivation is by far better than
any school I've been associated with. I get the
impression that kids don't come to A&M and College
Station and have a good time. I feel the decisions
are made back in high school. If they're looking
for a social experience, they don't necessarily
choose A&M. Choose University of Texas or someone
else. We
work our students hard, and our curriculum is a
little bit longer than most. So our students end up
with mechanical engineering almost a semester
longer than, say, the average, the national
average. So really, when you get an A&M mechanical
engineer, he is better because he has a little bit
more education than the average BS graduate. How
many hours is it take to complete the TAC
engineering program? It's 140 right now. Okay,
would
you discuss some of the research projects that are
underway or that have just been completed? Oh,
okay.
I'll discuss areas rather than projects.
We organized the department about three,
reorganized. Basically, the department about
three years ago was a department with one
organizational structure, no subunits. And of
course, I fully believe 30 people, good
management shows you that you can't really
interact with 30 people effectively, and that's
where we were. And I saw where we were going, too. So
we reorganized into four major areas. And we've
designated those areas as design, mechanical
systems, thermal science, and materials and
manufacturing. And it's easier for me to describe
the areas by referring back to these groups or the
research, because I remember what's going on
there. Starting with the design area, our major
push right now is in the computer-aided design
area. We have purchased a new computer. We're very
involved in, we prefer to call it computer-aided
engineering, but we're very involved in
simulation, in kinematics development as it
relates to robotics. We're involved in
finite elements, structural analysis, fracture
mechanics.
We do a lot of work relating to oil field problems. a
major international symposium on piping design
and stress analysis. So those are some of the
things that that group's involved in. The
mechanical systems group is involved in
vibrations, acoustics, rotor dynamics,
research in all these areas. We have a substantial
program going with the Veterans Administration
right now to build devices related to improving
the utility of handicapped people, to control
systems and let's say robotics-type systems for
allowing handicapped people to drive
automobiles.
We are involved in some
SEALs work, if this makes sense, relating to very
high RPM load situations that would typically be
involved. The work came out of the engine for the
new spacecraft. And so this is very high energy
pumps that require some very basic research in
what's going on in the seals and the bearings.
We're doing a lot of work in bearing research for
NASA. We are just getting a brand new NSF project,
which will be starting next month and some very
basic research in rotor dynamics and instability
problems associated with rotor dynamics. A major
effort we're making in that group is we're on the
verge of establishing a robotics laboratory. And
we are doing research in that area now. We
anticipate within a year or two from now we'll be
one of the major research institutions in the
country, hopefully. In the thermal science area,
that's the largest as far as the number of people.
It's very diverse. We typically look at it as
thermal science and thermal systems. Thermal
science, we're doing very basic research in fluid
mechanics, looking at turbulence, noise
generation from turbulent jets, structure of
turbulent jets, things of this sort. Over to the
applied area, we've just been designated as one of
the three research centers by the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research for gas-dynamic gas
turbine research, ourselves and Purdue and MIT.
And so our gas turbine laboratory is involved in
this research. We have a very active, large
combustion group that's involved in looking at
how you use alternate fuels in conventional
converters. In other words, we're looking at
things like how do you pelletize lignite for
making it useful in fluidized beds. We're looking
at how to use lignite in diesel engines and gas
turbines. And we work with the petroleum
engineering department in the in situ
gasification. We're looking at what do you do with
a gas that's generated from underground
gasification to use it in a gas turbine, to use it in
a diesel. We're doing, let's see, in combustion
research, we have a fire research lab where we're
looking at fire research problems associated
with industry. We're also looking at how to use
combustion as a safe, effective,
environmentally acceptable ways of disposing of
refuse from, say, oil spills Or oil wells, is this
an acceptable mechanism? We're doing basic
research in that area. In the materials area, of
course, manufacturing is one of the larger areas
we're pushing. Let me say fundamentally, getting
off the subject a bit, I perceive that the nation
faces four major technological areas that we need
to make strides in to
support the goals of society. And the four areas
are materials. The critical areas are materials.